Update best-practices.md for cross-platform C long (#23466)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/native-interop/best-practices.md

The following types are the same size on 32-bit and 64-bit Windows, despite their names.

| Width | Windows          | C#       | Alternative                          |
|:------|:-----------------|:---------|:-------------------------------------|
| 32    | `BOOL`           | `int`    | `bool`                               |
| 8     | `BOOLEAN`        | `byte`   | `[MarshalAs(UnmanagedType.U1)] bool` |
| 8     | `BYTE`           | `byte`   |                                      |
| 8     | `CHAR`           | `sbyte`  |                                      |
| 8     | `UCHAR`          | `byte`   |                                      |
| 16    | `SHORT`          | `short`  |                                      |
| 16    | `CSHORT`         | `short`  |                                      |
| 16    | `USHORT`         | `ushort` |                                      |
| 16    | `WORD`           | `ushort` |                                      |
| 16    | `ATOM`           | `ushort` |                                      |
| 32    | `INT`            | `int`    |                                      |

> | 32    | `LONG`           | `int`    |  See `CLong` and `CULong` below.     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 32    | `LONG`           | `int`    |  See [`CLong` and `CULong`](#cc-long).     |
```

> | 32    | `ULONG`          | `uint`   |  See `CLong` and `CULong` below.     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 32    | `ULONG`          | `uint`   |  See [`CLong` and `CULong`](#cc-long).      |
```

| 16    | `WORD`           | `unsigned short`     | `ushort` |                                      |
| 16    | `ATOM`           | `unsigned short`     | `ushort` |                                      |
| 32    | `INT`            | `int`                | `int`    |                                      |
| 32    | `LONG`           | `long`               | `int`    |  See `CLong` and `CULong` below.     |
| 32    | `ULONG`          | `unsigned long`      | `uint`   |  See `CLong` and `CULong` below.     |

> | 32    | `DWORD`          | `unsigned long`      | `uint`   |  See `CLong` and `CULong` below.     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 32    | `DWORD`          | `unsigned long`      | `uint`   |                                      |
```
I think this should be on the same plan as `HRESULT`.

| 64    | `QWORD`          | `long long`          | `long`   |                                      |
| 64    | `LARGE_INTEGER`  | `long long`          | `long`   |                                      |
| 64    | `LONGLONG`       | `long long`          | `long`   |                                      |
| 64    | `ULONGLONG`      | `unsigned long long` | `ulong`  |                                      |
| 64    | `ULARGE_INTEGER` | `unsigned long long` | `ulong`  |                                      |

> | 32    | `HRESULT`        | `int`                | `int`    |                                      |

Reviewer 2: This is technically incorrect since this column is called `C (Windows)` and HRESULT is really `long` on Windows. It may be best to delete the `C (Windows)` column. I do not think that it is helping.

| 16    | `WORD`           | `unsigned short`     | `ushort` |                                      |
| 16    | `ATOM`           | `unsigned short`     | `ushort` |                                      |
| 32    | `INT`            | `int`                | `int`    |                                      |
| 32    | `LONG`           | `long`               | `int`    |  See `CLong` and `CULong` below.     |
| 32    | `ULONG`          | `unsigned long`      | `uint`   |  See `CLong` and `CULong` below.     |

> | 32    | `DWORD`          | `unsigned long`      | `uint`   |  See `CLong` and `CULong` below.     |

Reviewer 3: What about `HRESULT` and `NTSTATUS` below? They are also Windows `long` and therefore on Windows only should be `int`/`uint`.

However, if that code is ported one-to-one to Windows (like was essentially done for https://devblogs.microsoft.com/directx/directx-heart-linux/, https://github.com/microsoft/DirectX-Headers/blob/main/include/wsl), they start requiring `CLong` and `CULong`.

Author: They actually did the right thing there. This should really be `unsigned int`. A 64-bit `HRESULT` is going to be a nightmare to convert.

https://github.com/microsoft/DirectX-Headers/blob/5b5b57aee33e8e38eff0242221893a43ac6ea90d/include/wsl/winadapter.h#L24

https://github.com/microsoft/DirectX-Headers/blob/5b5b57aee33e8e38eff0242221893a43ac6ea90d/include/wsl/winadapter.h#L185

Reviewer 2: That depends on how you choose to build your Windows emulator. NTSTATUS is 32-bit in CoreCLR PAL that number of projects copied Windows emulator layer from.

Reviewer 3: I don't think the change of `HRESULT`/`NTSTATUS` in the table to `int` is correct. They are fundamentally the `long` type in C and on Unix systems, without a typedef fixup, will be 32-64 bits.

Yes, the Windows intent is that it is 32-bits, same as the Windows intent is that DWORD is 32-bits. But, in practice it only matters what is used to compile on Unix which may still be `long` and which may not be retyped.

It is 100% a nightmare and it likewise causes issues between `Unix` and `Windows` because on `Windows` you can't represent a full point but the Unix intent might have been that it is a pointer.

I did miss that WSL had `typedef'd` `LONG` as `int32_t`; ut they've not handled other cases. `HWND` for example is a proper `void*` on Windows, but an `int` in the WSL header. `wchar_t` is a `uint16_t` on Windows and a `uint32_t` on Unix. `LPARAM; and `LONG_PTR` is a pointer on Windows, while they've typedef'd to `int64_t` 😄

Reviewer 2: Yes, building Windows emulation layers is fun and everybody does it slightly differently dependending on what makes the most sense for their specific component.

These differences make authoring cross-platform P/Invokes difficult when the native function is defined to use `long` on all platforms. 

In .NET 6 a new type has been introduced to help ameliorate this issue - [`CLong` and `CULong`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13788). In .NET 6 the following is now possible. The example is for `CLong`, but you can use `CULong` to abstract C's `unsigned long` in a similar way.

```csharp
// Cross platform C function
// long Function(long a);
[DllImport("NativeLib")]
extern static CLong Function(CLong a);
    
// Usage
int result = Function(new CLong(10)).Value;
```

When targeting .NET 5 and prior .NET versions, you should declare separate Windows and non-Windows signatures to handle the problem.

```csharp
static readonly bool IsWindows = RuntimeInformation.IsOSPlatform(OSPlatform.Windows);

// Cross platform C function
// long Function(long a);

[DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
extern static int FunctionWindows(int a);

[DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
extern static nint FunctionUnix(nint a);

// Usage
int result;
if (IsWindows)
{
    result = (int)FunctionWindows(10);
}
else
{

>     result = (int)FunctionUnix(10);

Reviewer 3: nit: This is potentially problematic as it may incorrectly truncate the return value on `Unix`. There are many Unix APIs that do restrict the value to 32-bits even when returning `long` on a 64-bit platform, but not all of them do.

}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Also mention CLong as alternative option for `long` in the "Common Windows data types" table, and/or link from that table to this paragraph?

> ## Windows and non-Windows data type considerations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Cross-platform data type considerations
```

There are types in the C language that have latitude in how they are defined. When writing cross-platform interop, cases can arise where platforms differ and can cause issues if not considered.

### C `long`

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
C `long` and C# `long` are not the same types. Using C# `long` to interop with C `long` is almost never correct.
```
This is very common newbie mistake. I think it is worth highlighting.

Reviewer 4: BTW in practice does this apply to C++ as well (since many times folks are writing C in code they consider C++)

Author: >BTW in practice does this apply to C++ as well (since many times folks are writing C in code they consider C++)

Yep. Exact same behavior.

Reviewer 4: Right I just meant, will folks writing C++ read this and skip over? Perhaps it should say C/C++. Whatver you think.

Author: Great suggestion. Will update.

The `long` keyword in C is defined to have ["at least 32"](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/arithmetic_types) bits. This means there is a minimum required but platforms are not limited to that. The table below illustrates the differences in provided bits for the C `long` data type between platforms.

|             | 32-bit | 64-bit |
|:------------|:-------|:-------|
| Windows     | 32     | 32     |
| macOS/\*nix | 32     | 64     |

These differences make authoring cross-platform P/Invokes difficult when the native function is defined to use `long` on all platforms. When targeting .NET 5 and prior .NET versions, you should declare separate Windows and non-Windows signatures to handle the problem.

```csharp
static readonly bool IsWindows = RuntimeInformation.IsOSPlatform(OSPlatform.Windows);

// Cross platform C function
// void Function(long a);

[DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
extern static void FunctionWindows(int a);

[DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
extern static void FunctionUnix(nint a);

// Usage
if (IsWindows)
{
    FunctionWindows(a);
}
else
{
    FunctionUnix(a);
}
```

> In .NET 6 a new type has been introduced to help ameliorate this issue - [`CLong` and `CULong`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13788). In .NET 6 the following is now possible. The example is for `CLong`, but you can use `CULong` to abstract C's `unsigned long` in a similar way.

Reviewer 2: Can this link to CLong and CULong type documentation instead of the dotnet/runtime issue?

Reviewer 4: Doesn't seem to exist - I asked @carlossanlop above when it appears.

Reviewer 5: [Answered](https://github.com/dotnet/docs/pull/23466#discussion_r600978192).

> In .NET 6 a new type has been introduced to help ameliorate this issue - [`CLong` and `CULong`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13788). In .NET 6 the following is now possible. The example is for `CLong`, but you can use `CULong` to abstract C's `unsigned long` in a similar way.

Reviewer 2: I would put the .NET 6+ solution first. My general rule for this sort of documentation is to optimize for future and put the simple modern way of doing stuff first, so that the people that are not the latest version of the platform do not need to read the whole history.

```csharp
// Cross platform C function

> // void Function(long a);
> [DllImport("NativeLib")]
> extern static void Function(CLong a);
>     
> // Usage
> Function(a);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// long Function(long a);
[DllImport("NativeLib")]
extern static long Function(CLong a);
    
int result = Function(new CLong(42)).Value;
```
Assuming type of `a` is same as in the other example, `Function(a)` won't actually compile. Also, it may be nice to demonstrate both to and from conversions.

```

> ## Structs

Reviewer 2: The doc jumps back and forth between general guidelines and very specific Windows stuff. I think overall flow of this document can be improved. It can be done in a different PR. 

General guidelines - strings, structs, fixed buffers, etc.
Cross-platform data type considerations
Platform-specific - Common Windows data types, Formerly built-in supported types

It may be even fine to split this into multiple docs. I see that we have [Writing cross platform P/Invoke code](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/native-interop/cross-platform). Should the "Cross-platform data type considerations" topic be there?

Author: Yes. This is part of the exercise being done with the interop-doc - what is a logical flow for learning about interop and best to walk users through writing interop solutions.

}
```

## Windows and non-Windows data type considerations

There are types in the C language that have latitude in how they are defined. When writing cross-platform interop, cases can arise where platforms differ and can cause issues if not considered.

### C `long`

> The `long` in C is defined to have ["at least 32"](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/arithmetic_types) bits. This means there is a minimum required but platforms are not limited to that. The table below illustrates the differences in provided bits for the C `long` data type between platforms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `long` keyword in C is defined to have ["at least 32"](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/arithmetic_types) bits. This means there is a minimum required but platforms are not limited to that. The table below illustrates the differences in provided bits for the C `long` data type between platforms.
```

|             | 32-bit | 64-bit |
|:------------|:-------|:-------|
| Windows     | 32     | 32     |
| macOS/\*nix | 32     | 64     |

These differences make authoring cross-platform P/Invokes difficult when the native function is defined to use `long` on all platforms. When targeting .NET 5 and prior .NET versions, you should declare separate Windows and non-Windows signatures to handle the problem.

```csharp
// Cross platform C function
// void Function(long a);
[DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
extern static void Function32(int a);

#if WINDOWS
    [DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
    extern static void Function64(int a);
#else
    [DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]

>     extern static void Function64(long a);

Reviewer 3: nit: C# `long` is only correct on 64-bit Unix. The correct type here is `IntPtr` or `nint` (and `UIntPtr`/`nuint` for `unsigned long`)

Reviewer 3: I see you actually discussed this in one of the collapsed threads.

I don't agree that it is incidental, the Unix ABI explicitly defines `unsigned long` to be the same size as `size_t` and therefore the same size as a pointer given the other constraints set in place.

Author: >nit: C# long is only correct on 64-bit Unix. 

It is also on macOS if I recall? I assume you are using Unix for all non-Windows platforms. That is the reason for the `64` suffix.

>The correct type here is IntPtr or nint (and UIntPtr/nuint for unsigned long)

I don't see it as the correct type. That is the pointer size and `long` isn't defined as being related to pointer size it just happens to align with that. It is a fine optimization for sure but as an example I prefer stating these sizes explicitly.

Author: > the Unix ABI explicitly defines unsigned long to be the same size as size_t and therefore the same size as a pointer given the other constraints set in place.

A link to this would be interesting. I was not aware that was an explicit decision.

Author: @tannergooding From what I am seeing this is the opposite - from https://uclibc.org/docs/psABI-x86_64.pdf.

> The type size_t is defined as unsigned long

Author: I guess it doesn't matter in principle - they are the same which we all agree. I don't see this as something that is required though because this is defined by a platform so it can be what they wish. I do accept it will work but as mentioned I prefer to keep this explicit and users are free to optimize as desired.

Reviewer 3: > A link to this would be interesting. I was not aware that was an explicit decision.

https://gitlab.com/x86-psABIs/i386-ABI and https://gitlab.com/x86-psABIs/x86-64-ABI

Specifically: https://gitlab.com/x86-psABIs/x86-64-ABI/-/blob/master/x86-64-ABI/low-level-sys-info.tex#L261 and https://gitlab.com/x86-psABIs/i386-ABI/-/blob/hjl/master/low-level-sys-info.tex#L151

I would think the preferred pattern here is actually:
```
private static readonly bool IsWindows = RuntimeInformation.IsOSPlatform(OSPlatform.Windows);

[DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
extern static void FunctionWindows(int a);

[DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
extern static void FunctionUnix(nint a);

if (IsWindows)
{
    FunctionWindows(a);
}
else
{
    FunctionUnix(a);
}
```

This results in the irrelevant path being optimized away as dead code and matches what we effectively do for `CLong`/`CULong` internally.
You might theoretically want an assert or check for `IsUnix`, but that isn't necessary given .NET Framework or .NET Core.

Author: Alright. I've been convinced. I will update the example. Thanks @tannergooding 

/cc @danmoseley @jkoritzinsky

Reviewer 4: I think this discussion was worthwhile because we're trying to establish a pattern for everyone. thanks.

> #endif

Reviewer 6: An alternative sample could be to use `int` on Windows and `IntPtr` on non-Windows and not split the code below on IntPtr.Size.

Reviewer 4: That's shorter, but perhaps less clearer. Does this suggest we're missing an `nlong`/`nulong` ?

Reviewer 6: That's what `CLong` and `CULong` are. This example is for before those types existed.

Author: >That's shorter, but IMO less clear.

I agree. This is a generalized pattern and people free to optimize it with that suggestion. I want to explicitly demonstrate the sizes. I think `IntPtr` is hiding too much here and is implying the `size_t` semantics here which this follows but that is incidental.

Reviewer 6: I understand the desire to be explicit. Let's go with the example you made.

}
```

## Windows and non-Windows data type considerations

There are types in the C language that have latitude in how they are defined. When writing cross-platform interop, cases can arise where platforms differ and can cause issues if not considered.

### C `long`

The `long` in C is defined to have ["at least 32"](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/arithmetic_types) bits. This means there is a minimum required but platforms are not limited to that. The table below illustrates the differences in provided bits for the C `long` data type between platforms.

|             | 32-bit | 64-bit |
|:------------|:-------|:-------|
| Windows     | 32     | 32     |
| macOS/\*nix | 32     | 64     |

> These differences make authoring cross-platform P/Invokes difficult when the native function is defined to use `long` on all platforms. It is recommended for .NET 5 and prior .NET version to declare a Windows and a non-Windows signature to handle the problem.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
These differences make authoring cross-platform P/Invokes difficult when the native function is defined to use `long` on all platforms. When targeting .NET 5 and prior .NET versions, you should declare separate Windows and non-Windows signatures to handle the problem.
```

```csharp
    // Cross platform C function
    // void Function(long a);

> #if WINDOWS

Reviewer 4: Maybe extract the identical 32 bit one out of the #if?

    [DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
    extern static void Function32(int a);
    [DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
    extern static void Function64(int a);
#else
    [DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
    extern static void Function32(int a);
    [DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
    extern static void Function64(long a);
#endif
    

> // Usage

Reviewer 4: This assumes you are compiling your IL for anycpu rather than x64/x86. I assume that's the most common practice (?)

Author: > I assume that's the most common practice (?)

Yes. I don't see the non-IL build's as common anymore outside of the runtime. I don't know who would define that best-practice but it is what we recommend.

if (IntPtr.Size == 4)
{
    Function32(a);
}
else
{
    Function64(a);
}
```

> In .NET 6 a new type has been introduced to help ameliorate this issue - [`CLong` and `CULong`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13788). In .NET 6 the following is now possible.

Reviewer 4: Ideally we'd have a doc to link to. @carlossanlop there are XML comments in the files [eg](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/1ee59da9f6104c611b137c9d14add04becefdf14/src/libraries/System.Private.CoreLib/src/System/Runtime/InteropServices/CLong.cs#L17-L25) should I expect that there's a page on docs.microsoft.com that will appear for these?

Reviewer 5: This public type was [introduced on Jan 12 2021](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/46401). We have not yet created any ".NET 6.0 Preview" entry in the [Version dropdown of MS Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices?view=net-5.0).

@AaronRobinsonMSFT I suggest you create an issue and add it to your backlog, so you can update this document and have the link point to the .NET 6.0 MS Docs API page of the `CLong` type, after we create the first Preview dropdown item.

```csharp
// Cross platform C function
// void Function(long a);
[DllImport("NativeLib")]
extern static void Function(CLong a);
    
// Usage
Function(a);
```

> 

Reviewer 4: "You can use `CULong` to abstract `ulong` in a similar way." ?

Reviewer 4: Should this also mention `NFloat` ?

Author: Yes. Example or a comment?

Author: Oh. Misread the suggestion :)

}
```

## Cross-platform data type considerations

There are types in the C/C++ language that have latitude in how they are defined. When writing cross-platform interop, cases can arise where platforms differ and can cause issues if not considered.

### C/C++ `long`

C/C++ `long` and C# `long` are not the same types. Using C# `long` to interop with C/C++ `long` is almost never correct.

> The `long` keyword in C/C++ is defined to have ["at least 32"](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/arithmetic_types) bits. This means there is a minimum required but platforms are not limited to that. The table below illustrates the differences in provided bits for the C/C++ `long` data type between platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `long` type in C/C++ is defined to have ["at least 32"](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/arithmetic_types) bits. This means there is a minimum number of required bits, but platforms can choose to use more bits if desired. The following table illustrates the differences in provided bits for the C/C++ `long` data type between platforms.
```

> |             | 32-bit | 64-bit |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Platform | 32-bit | 64-bit |
```

|:------------|:-------|:-------|
| Windows     | 32     | 32     |
| macOS/\*nix | 32     | 64     |

> These differences make authoring cross-platform P/Invokes difficult when the native function is defined to use `long` on all platforms.

Reviewer 2: Nit: It is not difficult in .NET 6+ anymore

> In .NET 6 a new type has been introduced to help ameliorate this issue - [`CLong` and `CULong`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13788). In .NET 6 the following is now possible. The example is for `CLong`, but you can use `CULong` to abstract C's `unsigned long` in a similar way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In .NET 6 and later versions, use [`CLong` and `CULong`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13788) types for interop with C `long` and `ulong` data types. The example is for `CLong`, but you can use `CULong` to abstract C's `unsigned long` in a similar way.
```
I think that this is the style usually used for documentation. "In .NET 6 the following is now possible" is what we would say in a blog post.

> In .NET 6 and later versions, use [`CLong` and `CULong`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13788) types for interop with C/C++ `long` and `unsigned long` data types. The example is for `CLong`, but you can use `CULong` to abstract `unsigned long` in a similar way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In .NET 6 and later versions, use the [`CLong` and `CULong`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13788) types for interop with C/C++ `long` and `unsigned long` data types. The following example is for `CLong`, but you can use `CULong` to abstract `unsigned long` in a similar way.
```

```csharp
// Cross platform C function
// long Function(long a);
[DllImport("NativeLib")]
extern static CLong Function(CLong a);
    
// Usage

> int result = Function(new CLong(10)).Value;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nint result = Function(new CLong(10)).Value;
```
Correcting my own mistake

```

> When targeting .NET 5 and prior .NET versions, you should declare separate Windows and non-Windows signatures to handle the problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When targeting .NET 5 and earlier .NET versions, you should declare separate Windows and non-Windows signatures to handle the problem.
```
I believe that earlier/later is what the documentation usually uses when refering to versions.

> When targeting .NET 5 and earlier .NET versions, you should declare separate Windows and non-Windows signatures to handle the problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When targeting .NET 5 and earlier versions, you should declare separate Windows and non-Windows signatures to handle the problem.
```

```csharp
static readonly bool IsWindows = RuntimeInformation.IsOSPlatform(OSPlatform.Windows);

// Cross platform C function
// long Function(long a);

[DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
extern static int FunctionWindows(int a);

[DllImport("NativeLib", EntryPoint = "Function")]
extern static nint FunctionUnix(nint a);

// Usage

> int result;
> if (IsWindows)
> {
>     result = (int)FunctionWindows(10);
> }
> else
> {
>     result = (int)FunctionUnix(10);
> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nint result;
if (IsWindows)
{
    result = FunctionWindows(10);
}
else
{
    result = FunctionUnix(10);
}
```
